operation Northwoods documents top
secret from the Joint Chiefs of Staff
13th of March 1962 memorandum for the
secretary of defense subject
justification for US military
intervention in Cuba 1 the Joint Chiefs
of Staff have considered the attached
memorandum for the chief of operations
Cuba project which responds to a request
of that office for brief but precise
description of pretexts which would
provide justification for US military
intervention in Cuba to the Joint Chiefs
of Staff recommend that the proposed
memorandum be forwarded as a preliminary
submission suitable for planning
purposes it is assumed that there will
be similar submissions from other
agencies and that these inputs will be
used as a basis for developing a
time-phased plan individual projects can
then be considered on a case-by-case
basis 3 further it is assumed that a
single agency will be given the primary
responsibility for developing military
and paramilitary aspects of the basic
plan it is recommended that this
responsibility for both overt and covert
military operations be assigned the
Joint Chiefs of Staff for the Joint
Chiefs of Staff signed ll Lemnitzer
chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff note by
the Secretary's to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff on Northwoods justification for US
military intervention in Cuba the
problem 1 as requested by chief of
operations Cuba project the Joint Chiefs
of Staff are to indicate brief but
precise description of pretexts which
they consider would provide
justification for US military
intervention in Cuba facts bearing on
the problem - it is recognized that any
action which becomes pretext for US
military intervention in Cuba will lead
to a political decision which then would
lead to mill
pterri action 3 cognizance has been
taken of a suggested course of action
proposed by the US Navy relating to
generated instances in the Guantanamo
area for four additional facts see
enclosure B discussion 5 the suggested
courses of action appended to enclosure
a are based on the premise that US
military intervention will result from a
period of heightened us-cuban tensions
which placed the United States in the
position of suffering justifiable
grievances world opinion and the United
Nations forum should be favorably
effected by developing the International
image of the Cuban government as rash
and irresponsible and as an alarming and
unpredictable threat to the Peace of the
Western Hemisphere 6 while the foregoing
premise can be utilized at the present
time it will continue to hold good only
as long as there can be reasonable
certainty that US military intervention
in Cuba would not directly involve the
Soviet Union there is as yet no
bilateral mutual support agreement
binding the USSR to the defense of Cuba
Cuba has not yet become a member of the
Warsaw Pact nor have the Soviets
established Soviet bases in Cuba in the
pattern of US bases in Western Europe
therefore since time appears to be an
important factor in resolution of the
Cuba problem all projects are suggested
within the timeframe of the next few
months
conclusion 7 the suggested courses of
action appended to enclosure a
satisfactorily respond to the statement
of the problem however these suggestions
should be forwarded as a preliminary
submission suitable for planning
purposes and together with similar
inputs from other agencies provide a
basis for deployment of a single
integrated time phased plan to focus all
efforts on the objective of
justification for US military
intervention in Cuba
recommendations 8 it is recommended that
a enclosure a together with its
attachments should be forwarded to the
Secretary of Defense for approval and
transmittal to the chief of operations
Cuba project B this paper not be
forwarded to commanders of unified or
specified commands see this paper not be
forwarded to us officers assigned to
NATO activities D this paper not be
forwarded to the chairman US delegation
United Nations military Staff Committee
enclosure a draft memorandum for the
Secretary of Defense subject
justification for US military
intervention in Cuba 1 the Joint Chiefs
of Staff have considered the attached
memorandum for the chief of operations
Cuba project which responds to a request
of that office for brief but precise
description of pretexts which would
provide justification for US military
intervention in Cuba to the Joint Chiefs
of Staff recommended that the proposed
memorandum before worded as a
preliminary submission suitable for
planning purposes it is assumed that
there will be similar submissions from
other agencies and that these inputs
will be used as a basis for developing a
time-phased plan individual projects can
then be considered on a case-by-case
basis three further it is assumed that a
single agency will be given the primary
responsibility for developing military
and paramilitary aspects of the basic
plan it is recommended that this
responsibility for both overt and covert
military operations be assigned the
Joint Chiefs of Staff appendix to
enclose your a draft memorandum for
chief of operations Cuba project subject
justification for US military
intervention in Cuba
one reference is made to memorandum from
chief of operations Cuba project for
General Craig subject operation Mongoose
dated 5th of March 1962 which requested
brief but precise description of
pretexts which the Joint Chiefs of Staff
consider would provide justification for
US military intervention in Cuba to the
projects listed in the enclosure hereto
are forwarded as a preliminary
submission suitable for planning
purposes it is assumed that there will
be similar submissions from other
agencies and that these inputs will be
used as a basis for developing a time
phased plan the individual projects can
then be considered on a case-by-case
basis 3 this plan incorporating projects
selected from the attached suggestions
or from other sources should be
developed to focus all efforts on a
specific ultimate objective which would
provide adequate justification for US
military intervention such a plan would
enable a logical buildup of incidents to
be combined with other seemingly
unrelated events to camouflage the
ultimate objective and create the
necessary impression of Cuban rashness
and irresponsibility on a large scale
directed at other countries as well as
the United States the plan would also
properly integrate and time phase the
courses of action to be pursued the
desired resultant from the execution of
this plan would be to place the United
States in the apparent position of
suffering defensible grievances from a
rash and irresponsible government of
Cuba and to develop an international
image of a Cuban threat to peace in the
Western Hemisphere
for time is an important factor in
resolution of the Cuban problem
therefore the plan should be so time
phased that projects would be operable
within the next few months five and as
much as the ultimate objective is overt
military intervention
is recommended that primary
responsibility for developing military
and paramilitary aspects of the plan for
both overt and covert military
operations be assigned the Joint Chiefs
of Staff annex 2 appendix to enclosure a
pretexts to justify US military
intervention in Cuba note the courses of
action which follow are a preliminary
submission suitable only for planning
purposes they are arranged neither
chronologically nor in ascending order
together with similar inputs from other
agencies they are intended to provide a
point of departure for the development
of a single integrated time phased plan
such a plan would permit the evaluation
of individual projects within the
context of cumulative correlated actions
designed to lead inexorably to the
objective of adequate justification for
US military intervention in Cuba one
since it would seem desirable to use
legitimate provocation as the basis for
US military intervention in Cuba a cover
and deception plan to include requisite
preliminary actions such as has been
developed in response to tasks 33c could
be executed as an initial effort to
provoke cuban reactions harassment plus
deceptive actions to convince the cubans
of imminent invasion would be emphasized
our military posture throughout
execution of the plan will allow a rapid
change from exercise to intervention if
cuban response justifies to a series of
well coordinated incidents will be
planned to take place in and around
guantanamo to give genuine appearance of
being done by hostile cuban forces a
incidents to establish a credible attack
not in chronological order one start
rumors many use clandestine radio to
land friendly cubans in uniform over the
fence to
staged attack on base three capture
cuban friendly saboteurs inside the base
for start riots near the base main gate
friendly cubans five blow up ammunition
inside the base start fires six burn
aircraft on air base sabotage seven lob
mortar shells from outside of base into
base some damage two installations eight
capture assault teams approaching from
the sea or vicinity of guantanamo city
nine capture militia group which storms
the base ten sabotage ship in Harbor
large fires naphthalene eleven sink
shipped near harbor entrance conduct
funerals for mock victims may be lieu of
ten be United States would respond by
executing offensive operations to secure
water and power supplies destroying
artillery and mortar emplacements which
threaten the base si commence
large-scale United States military
operations three a remember the main
incident could be arranged in several
forms a we could blow up a u.s. ship in
Guantanamo Bay and blame Cuba B we could
blow up a drone unmanned vessel anywhere
in the Cuban waters we could arrange to
cause such incident in the vicinity of
Havana or Santiago as a spectacular
result of Cuban attack from the air or
sea or both the presence of Cuban planes
or ships merely investigating the intent
of the vessel could be fairly compelling
evidence that the ship was taken under
attack the nearness to Havana or
Santiago would add credibility
especially to those people that might
have heard the blast or have seen the
fire the US could follow up with an air
sea
skew operation covered by us fighters to
evacuate remaining members of the
non-existent crew casualty lists in US
newspapers would cause a helpful wave of
national indignation for we could
develop a communist Cuban terror
campaign in the Miami area in other
Florida cities and even in Washington
the terror campaign could be pointed at
Cuban refugees seeking haven in the
United States we could sink a boatload
of Cubans on route to Florida real or
simulated we could foster attempts on
lives of Cuban refugees in the United
States even to the extent of wounding in
instances to be widely publicized
exploding a few plastic bombs and
carefully chosen spots the arrest of
Cuban agents and the release of prepared
documents substantiating cuban
involvement also would be helpful in
projecting the idea of an irresponsible
government v a cuban based castro
supported filibuster could be simulated
against a neighboring Caribbean nation
in the vein of the 14th of June invasion
of the Dominican Republic we know that
Castro is backing subversive efforts
clandestinely against Haiti Dominican
Republic Guatemala and Nicaragua at
present and possible others these
efforts can be magnified and additional
once contrived for exposure for example
advantage can be taken of the
sensitivity of the Dominican Air Force
to intrusions within their national
airspace Cuban b-26 or c-46 type
aircraft could make cane burning raids
at night Soviet bloc incendiaries could
be found this could be coupled with
Cuban messages to the communist
underground in the Dominican Republic
and Cuban shipments of arms which would
be found or intercepted on the beach six
use of MIG type aircraft by US pilots
could provide additional provocation
harassment of civil air attacks on
surface shipping and destruction of US
military drone aircraft
MiG type planes would be useful as
complimentary actions an f-86 properly
painted would convince air passengers
that they saw a Cuban MIG especially if
the pilot of the transport were to
announce such fact the primary drawback
to this suggestion appears to be the
security risk inherent in obtaining or
modifying an aircraft however reasonable
copies of the mig could be produced from
US resources in about three months seven
hijacking attempts against civil air and
surface craft should appear to continue
as harassing measures condoned by the
government of cuba concurrently genuine
defections of cuban civil and military
air and surface craft should be
encouraged eight it is possible to
create an incident which will
demonstrate convincingly that a cuban
aircraft has attacked and shot down a
chartered civil airliner
on route from the United States to
Jamaica Guatemala Panama or Venezuela
the destination would be chosen only to
cause the flight plan route to cross
Cuba the passengers could be a group of
college students off on a holiday or any
grouping of persons with a common
interest to support chartering a non
scheduled flight a an aircraft at eglin
air force base would be painted and
numbered as an exact duplicate for a
civil registered aircraft belonging to a
CIA proprietary organization in the
Miami area at a designated time the
duplicate would be substituted for the
actual civil aircraft and would be
loaded with the selected passengers all
boarded under carefully prepared aliases
the actual registered aircraft would be
converted to a drone be takeoff times of
the drone aircraft and the actual
aircraft will be scheduled to allow a
rendezvous south of Florida from the
rendezvous point the passenger carrying
aircraft will descend to minimum
altitude and go directly into an
auxilary field at Eglin Air Force Base
where arrangements will have been made
to evacuate the passengers and return
the aircraft to its original status the
drone aircraft meanwhile will continue
to fly the filed flight plan when over
Cuba the drone will begin transmitting
on the International distress frequency
a mayday message stating he is under
attack by Cuban MIG aircraft the
transmission will be interrupted by
destruction of the aircraft which will
be triggered by radio signal
this will allow ICAO radio stations in
the Western Hemisphere to tell the US
what has happened to the aircraft
instead of the u.s. trying to sell the
incident 9 it is possible to create an
incident which will make it appear that
communist Cuban MiG's have destroyed a
US Air Force aircraft over international
waters in an unprovoked attack a
approximately four or five f-101
aircraft will be dispatched in trail
from homestead Air Force Base Florida to
the vicinity of Cuba their mission will
be to reverse course and simulate faqir
aircraft for an air defense exercise in
southern Florida these aircraft would
conduct variations of these flights at
frequent intervals crews would be
briefed to remain at least 12 miles off
the cuban coast however they would be
required to carry live ammunition in the
event that hostile actions were taken by
the Cuban MiG's B on one such flight a
pre briefed pilot would fly tail-end
charlie at considerable interval between
aircraft while near the cuban island
this pilot would broadcast that he had
been jumped by MiG's and was going down
no other calls would be made the pilot
would then fly directly west at
extremely low altitude and land at a
secure base an Eglin auxilary the
aircraft would be met by the proper
people quickly stored and given a new
tail number the pilot who had performed
the mission under an alias would resume
his proper identity and return to his
normal place of business the pilot and
aircraft would then have disappeared
see at precisely the same time that the
aircraft was presumably shot down a
submarine or small surface craft would
disperse f-101 parts parachute etc and
approximately 15 to 20 miles off the
cuban coast and depart the pilots
returning to homestead would have a true
story as far as they knew search ships
and aircraft could be dispatched and
parts of aircraft found enclosure be
facts bearing on the problem one the
Joint Chiefs of Staff have previously
stated that US unilateral military
intervention in Cuba can be undertaken
in the event that the Cuban regime
commits hostile acts against US forces
or property which would serve as an
incident upon which to base overt
intervention to the need for positive
action in the event that current covert
efforts to foster an internal Cuban
rebellion are unsuccessful was indicated
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff on 7th of
March 1962 as follows quote
determination that a credible internal
revolt is impossible of attainment
during the next nine to ten months will
require a decision by the United States
to develop a Cuban provocation as
justification for positive US military
action
end quote three it is understood that
the Department of State also is
preparing suggested courses of action to
develop justification for u.s. military
intervention in Cuba